---
layout: post
title: "The Traveling Salesman Problem: Installing Concorde on Mac Catalina with CPLEX"
sitemap: false
---

Long time no post and, unfortunately for the casual reader, this post is mostly describing how to install Concorde optimizer for the Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP) with Mac OS Catalina using the CPLEX backend. If this means nothing to you, click away!

First: CPLEX is a commercial linear programming solver available free for the academic community. I guess the idea is to hook us so that we pay when we leave or convince our organizations to pay for a license when we leave. 

Second: Concorde is what the `TSP` package in `R` calls state of the art for getting an exact solution to the Traveling Salesman Problem. The only problem is that one must install it separately and since Concorde was last updated in 2003, some things don't work quite as easily as we would like. For example, it was made to run with CPLEX 8 but the current CPLEX version on my machine is 12.10! Now, on to the actual installation details.

1. Download Concorde<br>
Concorde can be downloaded from [here](math.uwaterloo.ca/tsp/concorde/downloads/codes/src/co031219.tgz).

2. Download and Install CPLEX<br>
See the [IBM website](https://www.ibm.com/products/ilog-cplex-optimization-studio
) for more details 
3. Untar the Concorde files<br>
```unix
tar xvf co031219.tar
```

4. Enter the Concorde directory<br>
```unix
cd /path/to/concorde
```

5. Create a symlink to the CPLEX files<br>
On my machine, this looks something like:<br>
```unix
ln -s /path/to/cplex/include/ilcplex/*.h .
ln -s /path/to/cplex/lib/x86-64_osx/static_pic/libcplex.a .
```
note: this is done inside the Concorde directory.

6. Add compiler flags<br>
```unix
export CFLAGS="-g -O3 -arch x86_64"
```

7. Change Concorde files<br>
In “concorde/Makefile.in” change LIBFLAGS to:<br>
```unix
LIBFLAGS = @LIBS@ -lpthread
```
In “concorde/TSP/Makefile.in” change LIBFLAGS to:<br>
```unix
LIBFLAGS = @LIBS@ -lpthread -ldl
```
In “concorde/LP/lpcplex8.c” after #undef  CC_CPLEX_DISPLAY add:<br>
```unix
#ifndef CPX_PARAM_FASTMIP
#define CPX_PARAM_FASTMIP 1017
#endif
```
In “concorde/TSP/tsp_call.c” at line 479, change the 0 to a 1 (see [this post](https://www.ibm.com/developerworks/community/forums/html/topic?id=96be05f6-fca8-4679-8733-28c034755ffc&permalinkReplyUuid=f7df291c-4717-45c6-b416-a86c69100d35) by one of the designers of Concorde)

8. Run configure<br>
Note the host option. It gives a warning saying it doesn't know what "darwin" is on my machine, but won't run without it ¯\_(ツ)_/¯ <br>
```unix
./configure --host=darwin --prefix=/path/to/concorde –with-cplex=/path/to/concorde
```

9. Run make<br>
```unix
make
```

10. If you can run Concorde without an error, you're done!
The easiest way for me is within the TSP R package. You may need to specify the location of the Concorde TSP files like so:<br>
```r
tsp::concorde_path(path = "/path/to/concorde/TSP")
```

11. And then check the TSP example:<br>
```r
data("USCA312", package = "TSP")
TSP::solve_TSP(USCA312, method = "concorde", control = list(clo = "-V"))
```
If that works, then you should be all set!
 
Details from this post come from [this other post](leandro-coelho.com/install-and-run-concorde-with-cplex/) by Professor Leandro Coelho and [this post](qmha.wordpress.com/2015/08/20/installing-concorde-on-mac-os-x/) by Hà Quang Minh, adapted to what worked on my machine (mid-2019 MacBook Air).